the 2010 decade started off
exceptionally for Intel nobody could
have predicted that Sandy Bridge would
have produced the gains that we saw with
it and if you did you might have thought
that those gains would have continued
throughout the next five or so years at
least
instead what ended up happening was
somewhere in the middle of the decade
around the 4000 6000 7000 series there
was serious stagnation beginning to
happen for Intel's parts Intel at the
time was content with doing four core 8
thread I sevens over and over and had no
competition at all from AMD other than
FX parts that were later dragged through
a class-action lawsuit so the decade
started off strong and today we're doing
a revisit of Intel's parts made from
about 2010 until about 2019 to look at
how the company performed over the years
what its percent scaling was and how the
asymptotic curve starts to look at what
point does it start to flatline four
Intel's performance advancements that
will carry us into the ten series coming
up very shortly before that this video
is brought to you by US and the gamers
access large mod mat we just received a
massive restock and we'll be shipping
all back orders and new orders
immediately so if you've been waiting
for one of our critically acclaimed
anti-static PC building services now is
a great time to order the mod mats
protect your table during builds and
include pin out diagrams that we use
nearly daily for power testing they also
have grids with a silhouette to aid in
tracking screws for your own component
tear downs and use an anti-static
material made by our factory that makes
cleaner and parts to help protect
sensitive electronics
grab your GN mod mat on store documents
like cisnet today and it'll ship
immediately
despite its marketing the Intel 10
series CPUs actually look kind of
promising we can't really comment on it
yet because we haven't tested it and if
we did we'd still be under NDA for it
but as of filming we don't have the
parts physically in hand so we'll hold
our breath on it but the biggest change
is that Intel's making is its increasing
core account and it's keeping the price
at least the same at a given level in
the stack where the 10 700 K and a 10
900k damn'd as their names maybe are in
better positions than Intel was
previously so yes Intel now has as one
of the college's pointed out achieve
the feat of having something like half
or more of its product portfolio in the
core series being 14 nanometer silicon
and refresh is at that but the company
is trying to move forward what we need
to do is look back at the previous
decade 2600 k 2500 K owners of those
CPUs for a long time now from our other
revisits you know that you can feel
proud about your purchases because those
are some phenomenal parts especially
once you overclock them they carry well
into the 4000 and even 6000 series stock
performance in some instances but things
did sort of taper out and moving forward
where Intel really needs at this point
in order to up its competition against
Andy is going to be another one of those
killer Sandy Bridge parts we'll see if
that's the 10 series and even if it is
it does have rising to compete with
these days but nonetheless competition
is in fact a good thing and it's more
than just something people say it is
what pushes these companies to make
better products and reduce the prices so
today we're going to be talking about
the relative pricing of Intel's old CPUs
versus new and how there's been a price
creep over the years an increase that
exceeds inflation and we'll also be
talking through the relative performance
from CPU to CPU within and outside of
given price brackets so we've got a good
amount of games we're narrowing in on
almost entirely Intel results on this so
don't be mad that you're not seeing a
lot of Andy the focus is a decade of
Intel we're telling the story of what
has Intel's last 10 years what have they
looked like how is it progressed that's
the focus for perspective we have
included AMD parts and solve these
charts some of them have a few more than
others but we've got at least an AMD r5
3600 when talking about high fives at
least in a.m. the r7 3700 X been talking
about i7 and sometimes more than that so
our focus again is Intel today if you
want to see AMD benchmarks we have a
brand new testing methodology getting
deployed probably in tomorrow's video
with tests from both vendors and then
we're going to be starting to roll out
some new videos using that methodology
so stay tuned for that but let's get
started with a decade of Intel in review
GTA 5 is a great game to start with for
this
civic benchmark and that's because it's
old enough to have been new when several
these CPUs we're still coming out hard
note here our next chart looks at a new
game because that's important for core
utilization that's changed a lot over
the years we'll start with just a
breakout chart highlighting the key i5
CPUs so that'd be the 2500 k35 70k 4690k
600 K 7600 K 8400 and the 9600 K first
we should point out how a tightly packed
some of these CPUs are ignoring
overclocked data the top to bottom rein
just 49 FPS for the gap or an
improvement of 77% over a 10-year period
if we restrict that down to the 4690k
which launched in 2014 the stock
improvement is about 43% those aren't
great numbers and show exactly why
everyone has almost wholesale stopped
talking about i5 CPUs the higher-end
CPUs have shown great gains but I 5 has
become the dumping ground for intel's
filler part and that's why it's lost the
battle - and these are 5 Series the
decade started 5 years before GTA 5 came
out but the 2500 K plotting a 64 FPS
average and loads that are actually
sustainable shows that it's still strong
even 5 years after its launch the 2500 K
is able to hold on at playable frame
rates and frame times on new games while
new ish in this case the 35 to 70 K came
out in 2012
for $250 following the 2500 KS 216
dollar prize with an uplift of nine
point seven percent as the generations
went on those improvements condensed the
7600 K only improved 6% over the 6600 K
and that's the era we started telling
our readers not to upgrade if they had
the previous series part in their system
already we'll come back to GTA 5 in a
second for i7 parts but we need some
contacts for actual i-5 improvement over
the years for that let's look at a more
modern game for shadow of the Tomb
Raider with just the i5 CPU is we see a
far greater scale than in GTA 5 this is
obviously because of an increase in core
utilization with newer titles and is
highlighted by the now larger gap of
about one hundred and sixty three
percent increase from the 2,500 case
stock to the 9600 case stock that looks
a lot better the 2500 K is still
something of a beast for a decade-old
part but it's not as impressive here as
it was in an older title the
thirty-five 70k gained about 14% the
4690k canned about 17% over the 35 70 K
and the 6600 K gained 21% over that the
4690k overclocked is found above the
stock 6600 K and is exactly why that was
around the time when we stopped
recommending upgrades again for owners
who had recent parts that's still a
massive jump for both to be fair the
8400 really piled it on though and
gained 56% over the stock 6600 K CPU
this isn't even the 80 600 K part which
we haven't retested recently the key
difference of course was the core count
increased the 9600 K became boring again
at three point eight percent gained
unfortunately but OC hadn't pushed it
the rest of the way
switching over to an i7 chart borrowing
the i9 since it's totally different in
price class and also not an i7 we
returned to GT a momentarily remember
that the 9700 K is $380 to $400 retail
while the older i7 part's ranged from
317 to $350 we've also added the ice of
a 930 in a hail important here but it's
older than our decade marker astute
viewers will notice that the 2600 K is
about the same as the 2500 K in
performance and even slightly lower this
was back when hyper-threading sometimes
had more overhead than it had benefit
and so you'd occasionally see about a 1%
gain performance hit between i5 and i7
parts that were otherwise identical
that's why an i5 is not for gaming came
about because it was not only accurate
to say but it was often technically the
better purchase the lack of
differentiation between i5 and i7 parts
faded away with time though the top to
bottom range starting at the 2600 K to
9700 K stock is 95% for 10 years or 36%
for 6 years at the 4790k the i7 CPU is
stagnated around the 6700 to 8700 k era
in older games like this but the 8700 K
became an important CPU for newer games
and for applications with more thread
dependence this was when Intel and AMD
were rapidly releasing new parts one
after the other and it was a close
battle where the 87 hard K was able to
win back some of the applications that
Intel had lost with the rise and launch
one thing's for damn sure though nothing
quite overclocked like the same
Brij parts that jump is colossal at 26%
improved over its own stock results the
2600 K remains one of the best CPUs
that's come out in the last decade we
partially missed these days but it also
just means that both AMD and Intel or
shipping parts closer to maximum
performance before moving on here's a
chart of all the i5 i7 + i9 non HED T
CPUs for GTA 5 the 99 RK clearly chokes
on the limitations of this game
providing no value over the 9700 K or
even an overclocked to 9600 K more
importantly look at the 2500 K versus
the 2600 K they're about the same and
some hyper threading overhead is visible
outside of test variants the 4690k and
4790k have a clear Delta at 6.8%
improved on the i7 the sixty six hundred
and sixty seven hundred KS show similar
at a 6.5 percent increase still it's
obvious why an i5 4690k was the best
gaming buy at a time and why these 6600
K mostly followed no one wanted to pay
an extra $100 between board and CPU to
gain 6% frame rate especially with an e
zi v OC time to move on here's the chart
for Tomb Raider again but for i7 CPUs
the previous and current decades bled
together with the i7 930 which is
actually a surprisingly strong performer
in this game but the 2600 K is where
will officially start the discussion
stock 2600 k2 stock 9700 K the
improvement is about 129 percent over 10
years not as much as in the i5 series
which saw a paradigm shift that
increased the thread count but still
better than GTA 5 s results the 2600 K
overclock is another high score with a
31% increase which you never hear of
today and that helps compound the
difficulty of advancing CPUs Intel has
shrunken OC Headroom as a byproduct of
increasing out of box frequencies closer
to their limits but still had
generational slowdowns in the 6,000 and
7,000 eras one a refresh of the other
and then again in the 9000 and 8000 era
where we had a refresh of basically a
refresh the 8700 K is interesting
because it's extra threads make it
actually better in some applications but
the 9700 K does make up for any deaf
with increased frequency Headroom the
2600 case docked to 4790k stock jump was
48 percent skipping one generation 3000
or 14 percent from the OC 2600 k 4790k
to 6700 k which was the real jump pushed
24% higher the 7700 K was 3.8 percent
higher
yikes and the 8700 K was 15% better than
that here's the chart of all the desktop
CPUs for Intel that we've tested lately
plus the 3700 X the 99 hundred KS nine
hundred K and 9700 k OC are all reaching
the upper bound of the GPU and so we're
starting to encounter GPU bottleneck in
this particular game we see the opposite
of GTA the 2500 K and 2600 K actually
have a meaningful gap between them about
32% higher on the i7 and that's thanks
to higher core dependence with newer
titles this is great historical
information on why everyone including us
was completely content with recommending
an i5 for gaming background B has well
and surrounding generations these types
of games didn't really exist yet at
least not very many of them did
Assassin's Creed is next this is another
series where a core account really
started to matter the top to bottom
range Frye 5 CPUs runs 125 percent from
the 2500 K at 51 FPS average to 114 FPS
average the i5 CPUs have another very
clear division in the chart just like
Tomb Raider there's a 39% climb from the
7600 K to the 8400 which isn't even a
case Q part and that's a clear benefit
of the core account increase the 9600 K
posted smaller gains and smaller still
if we had a fresh 86 100 K retested here
but overclocking Headroom of the 9000
series allowed it some room to grow the
trouble of course is that this would eat
into the performance growth for the next
generation part if it remained on 6
cores and six threats since Intel is
about at its limits of frequency for
this process
fortunately for Intel it has
restructured the core account for the
entire stack so this stagnation should
be at least temporarily resolved we'll
likely see another large jump in
appropriate games the gains are like
this 2500 K to 35 70 K we saw a 13%
increase 4690 to 600 K stock was a
noteworthy 21 percent but the 4690k OC
gave us 24% and surpassed the stock's
kay the 7600 keg and a dismal 2.6
percent over the 6600 K showing
stagnation and the 8000 series
temporarily resolves that here's the i7
chart the 9700 K really establishes a
firm lead over intel's previous 8700 k
despite a lower thread count this is
where modern games start to really work
well on eight cores and the higher
frequency and lower resource contention
accomplishes the rest the 2600 case told
as well at 58 FPS average and our top to
bottom gain is 140 percent stock to
stock the 2600 k OC was insane once
again gaining significantly and
encroaching on intel's smothered child
the 5775 see that it wants you to forget
about the 4790k gained 46 percent over
the 2600 k by skipping a generation or
26 percent comparing the 4.8 gigahertz
4790k to the 4.7 gigahertz 2600 k the
6700 K showed that the curve was slowing
to an asymptotic plateau at fourteen
point seven percent gained than a measly
two percent gain with the 7700 K the
8700 K jumped back to 14 percent then 23
percent for the 9700 cave that's more of
what we want to see and what hopefully
we'll see with the 10 series of Intel
desktop CPUs but that 7700 K and the era
surrounding it I was a little bit rough
here's the chart for everything the
interesting note is the i-580 400s
performance over the 7700 K where it's
even clearer that newer games then the
6600 K started caring more about the
extra cores for core 8 thread setups
aren't always as good or better than the
six core 6 thread setups it depends on
the application some of that is thanks
to consoles where the higher core count
designs have advanced games to finally
start leveraging them and that's just a
matter of testing games from different
eras where that was already a change in
place with the consoles the 9900 kks and
9700 KOC results are all bumping off the
GPU bottleneck so we can't really see
the full top range of performance here
civilization 6 is next which is more of
a frequency happy test that doesn't care
as much for cores and this one Intel's
generational gains aren't as impressive
as in the previous two games it's more
like GTA we see a 30% reduction in turn
time requirement between the stock 9600
K and side
2,500 K so that's ten years to get you a
30% reduction and turn time required but
the stat math gets a bit funny here
since we're now talking about reduction
rather than an increase if you converted
this to scoring and started by highest
it'd be equivalent to about an 80%
increase in performance that's
significantly below still the 120 to 140
percent marker we saw in more thread
dependent titles and is more of what
people think of when they picture Intel
generational stagnation prior to the
8000 series the 2500 K is a 35 70 K jump
is just a six point four percent
reduction 3570 k2 4690k is a more
noteworthy 10% reduction 6600 K is
faster by an additional ten point four
percent over the 4690k and on the 4690k
OC leads that the 7600 K a six percent
reduction this time and on the i5 8400
did nothing to fix that and neither
would the 8600 cage maybe to a less
significant degree here's the full chart
the 2600 K and 2500 K did have a
meaningful gap in this one but the 3570
K didn't move very much versus the
previous i7 other interesting notes are
that the 900 K and KS illustrate the
frequency being responsible for the top
of chart gains as 40 nanometer hits the
final limits with Intel TBB is
stretching 100 megahertz more sometimes
in 10th gen if you call it a Gen Intel
is going to need new tricks after the
10th series to keep pushing further
everyone 2018 is also a frequency happy
application in this one we see an 88%
gain from the 2500 kf5 9600 K this is
the type of game that created the
feeling of stagnation as well
unlike Tomb Raider and assassin's creed
here we're seeing limited gains of about
7% from 35 to 70 K to 4690k and just 10%
from the 4690k it's a 6600 case stock
that's without even considering
overclocking the 2600 K at 4.7 gigahertz
makes purchasers of Sandy Bridge no
doubt feel smug or at least prideful in
their choice the i7 series outside of
this one was similar overall to the i5
series with the 6700 K only gaining
about seven and a half percent
performance over the 4790k and the 9900
Kaos shows that there's still somehow
room in our 300 FPS plus range to gain
more frames with an overclock this is
the type of game where
ten series probably won't look as good
since it won't be able to leverage its
threat increases as well and we'll have
to rely on the smaller 100 megahertz
gains in boost hitman 2 with dx12 is an
interesting one here we see the larger
top-to-bottom range emerging between the
9600 k stock and 2500 case stock it's
about a 115 percent gain over the decade
and i5 performance increases for i7s
it's a gain from sixty six point six FPS
average to 140 FPS average or 111
percent the 2600 K gets another shoutout
for its overclock nearly matching a many
years later released 7600 K and outdoing
it in frame time consistency as well
thanks to the higher thread count while
the 6700 K gets a nod for out doing the
9600 K s stock CPU the 9900 K s
demonstrates that the upper limit of
this is the GPU at around 144 FPS
average so we don't have the test
resolution to see scaling beyond a stock
9700 K this is also going to become a
challenge for new CPUs although we could
synthetically create more CPU load by
driving graphics options down at some
point you exit realism it won't be until
the 3000 series on video cards that this
range will expand easily let's switch
over to some production discussion we'll
begin our benchmarks with an all core
workload just because it's an easier
point to evaluate there are fewer
variables involved and it's a purist
look at CPU performance over the ages
our blender monkeyhead render starts us
off before doing the full Intel chart
we're beginning with the look at only
Intel CPUs that launched at 317 to $380
this is the old i7 class before an i-9
shuffled the entire stack and everyone's
expectations with it the 317 dollar
Intel i7 2602 sender in 65 minutes with
an overclock improving performance by
23% we don't have a 3770k on here so
we'll skip one generation the 4790k
offered an improvement over the 2600 K
of about 34% from stock to stock doing
so at about a 30 dollar premium
overclocking Headroom was more limited
as this was already a better version of
the 4770k and restricted us to 7.8
percent reduction in time required the
5775 seeds had worse than the 4790k but
was also a weird cpu that intel forgot
about and immediately buried with these
6700 K the 67 100k
reduced render time by 8.3 percent over
the 4790k and that's the 7700 K reduced
render time by six point three percent
at this point and tells generational
gains had dropped from double digits
between the Halo and Sandy Bridge and
Sandy Bridge to Devil's Canyon all the
way down to low single digits on these
7700 K the 87 R K changed this up thanks
to pressure from AMD bringing higher
core countdown to the $380 part the
improvement versus the 7700 K it was a
mass of 30% but you can't do that
forever without killing the entire high
end the 9700 K 1 in the opposite
direction while costing roughly the same
about 380 to $400 retail and suffered
from a greedy choice to cut
hyper-threading this worsened the i7
generationally and the 97 under K only
survived on his frequency that I earn
hundred K isn't shown because its price
is at $500 but for verbal reference its
performance has it about 20 minutes
stock or 17 minutes overclocked the GN
logo render is next the reason the 2600
K has such a profound legacy is because
of moments like this where it can cut a
91 minute render time down to 68 minutes
or 25% reduction there's a 38% render
time reduction going from the stock 2600
k2 4790k stock then a hike to the 57 25
C then a reduction to the 6700 K that
drop is 11% still in the double digits
the 6700 case stocks at 7700 K stock is
only a 6% reduction while the
overclocked 6700 K actually outperforms
the stock 7700 again this is where Intel
ran into its severe stagnation problems
more pronounced than even 4,000 to 6,000
in this instance and it had to change
the 8700 K got it back on track and then
the 97 hard k stagnated again these are
all CPUs that launched at about the same
price so intel has run into very real
limitations about pacing its
architectural improvements with its
product release cycle and it was
reluctant or unable to add more cores in
at these 300 to 400 marks with the
result being a further widening of the
void the chart for all of the blender
results looks like this for the monkey
heads we've removed several of these
7,000 and 9,000 h EDT parts since
they're basically the same as that's 10
series HDD t parts for the most part and
the chart was getting too cluttered
anyway the 9 out her K is well
positioned here relative to past and
present CPUs
but we'd argue that the 8700 and the i7
2600k remain the two best value CPUs on
this chart from this series of course
we're talking respective to the time
that they came out the 8700 K was a real
kick to the teeth for Andy's new risin 7
1700 and put Intel back in a competitive
position but that time was short-lived
as Intel pushed the cpu out before
supply was even ready before boards were
even ready and then had nothing left to
work with the 99er k was its next big
move but that also moved to the price
and it'll significantly higher than the
rest of the stack something which the
newly announced 10 series dt parts are
correcting the i5 lineup at least
impressed in one way previously the
4690k brought nearly 2,600 K performance
except to add a price reduction to $240
that was a meaningful change and the
4690k was one of the best gaming parts
at the time as well it was a huge leap
about 18.5% from the 35 70 K previously
here even the 35 70 K improved over the
2500 K by 12% on its own let's move on
to another application 7 said
compression and decompression our next
starting with the latter the
decompression results show limited
generational gains in some instances
like the seven and a half percent jump
from the 2500 K to the 35 70 K but
there's an overall 119 percent increase
from the 2500 case stock to 9600 case
stock CPUs some results are less
impressive like the fact that it took
intel for numerical generations not the
same as actual generations to get the i7
2670 and i5 6600 k part the i7 6700k
though gained about 44 percent over the
2600 k in that same time for i7 cpu is
the 9700 k to 2600 k void is a 141
percent increase with the overclock
producing some extra value at the top
and this is an interesting chart where
generationally the differences are
sometimes small from one to the next the
6700 K to 7700 K in this instance or the
2600 k OC nearly equal in the 6700 K 5
years later as IPC increases and core
count ticks up we can see the gap wide
and Intel needs to keep this trend into
the 10 series of desktop CPUs in
to get an advancement into the double
digits and they might do it with the
core account to increase at similar
prices to nine serious CPUs so the 3700
X is great perspective for Intel's
positioning as as the 3600 a $200 part
that outperforms most of Intel's lineup
for compression the story is similar the
2500 km 9600 K improvement is 117
percent while the 2600 K it some 9700 K
improvement is 129 percent the 9900 K
increases the ceiling but it also
increased the price it's the 10 series
where we should see another meaningful
jump in all these charts at hopefully
lower prices closer to the original cost
of the chips this last chart doesn't
follow our theme Foley it's only six
years of Intel CPUs so we apologize for
that but it's still a good
representation we're looking at Adobe
from your render time for a 1080p 60hz
264 video this is for all the CPUs that
are relevant here
the 4690k finishes the render and nine
and a half minutes while the 6600 K gets
a market 13% render time reduction keep
in mind that the 5775 see as an
imaginary CPU that no one could buy so
the 6600 K is basically the actual
generational step the 7600 K improved 7%
which brought it to 4790k stock
performance from a few years prior on
this chart we're seeing a bigger impact
from threads than we might have in years
past a change that adobe made in recent
versions we see diminishing returns
though with the 9900 K but just to show
that the performance is not artificially
limited we've added the 10 980 accion
this chart to show us the real seal
inner floor if you prefer a performance
while the 31 35 X shows us that thread
increases eventually fall off a few AMD
parts are also scattered for perspective
if you want to pause it and look at
those but our focus is on ten years of
Intel not much changes on the 4k chart
in the hierarchy there's a harder line
drawn at thread increases between the
9900 K and 3950 X so this workload does
torture the CPUs a bit harder but the
hierarchy is nearly identical other than
a few shifts looking back at all this
data then it's always kind of
eye-opening to see just how well Sandy
Bridge scaled with overclocking we've
read benchmarked Sandy Bridge annually
for like three years now there's a
reason for it a lot of people
bought those CPUs and a lot of people
really care about the numbers today
because they're still good but either
way the 10 series is going to be an
important one to consider here
Intel is probably almost certainly at
this point going to stay at the top and
gaming charts there becomes a difficulty
for Intel where now the CPS are getting
fast enough and there hasn't been a new
GPU generation that you're starting to
really have to try to create a CPU bound
load in games to the point where it
might not be as realistic anymore and we
don't ever test 720p the only time we
did that was maybe one article for early
I GPS and apu is probably circa 2013 or
something like that maybe 2012 but we
always stick with at least 1080p
baseline 1440p and for the most part a
lot of games are obviously GPU bound so
yes you can create a bottleneck but
there's a reasonable level given Sandy
Bridge is phenomenal positioning in the
market it's hard to believe that Intel
will start this decade with the same
position that Sandy Bridge did if we
look at AMD right now it seems like
perhaps there are 3000 series parts or
about where that was Rison one like the
1700 good part it wasn't really
competitive head-to-head and gaming just
yet it was one of those well it does
well enough and if you want the threads
for other tasks like production
workloads then go for it but otherwise
if you just want a game keep buying
Intel at the top end that started
changing when Intel's top end serious
competitors got to four hundred and five
hundred dollars so Rison 1000 is
probably comparable to Nehalem and Rison
two or three thousand might be the Sandy
Bridge analog so whether Intel's 10
series can achieve the same level of
status as Sandy Bridge that remains to
be seen obviously we'll be testing that
shortly and reviews coming up sometime
in the future in May so keep an eye on
that but that's your decade and review
certainly if it hadn't been already
known Intel had a very strong start to
the decade it flatlined in the center
with four thousand six thousand seven
thousand five thousand doesn't really
count until buried that with six
thousand immediately
that was the true successor in desktop
but 5000 was very good for the things it
was good at it's unfortunately got
buried and then later on eight thousand
nine thousand but particularly eight
thousand Intel started to wake up again
so now ten series is we're gonna see
okay have they actually fully woken up
where does Intel still need to hit some
kind of silicon process advanced to get
back into gear check back for all that
subscribe for more as always you can get
a straw document excess net to grab one
of our large mod mats we've just
restocked them we were out of stock for
a long time due to a mix of human
malware and other shipping logistics
challenges surrounding that but they're
back now so visit the store if you want
to pick one up or go to
patreon.com/scishow and axis it helps
out there as well we'll see you all next
time